Adding text to Human clinical health data page (#327)
elixir-europe/infectious-diseases-toolkit: data-description/human-clinical-and-health-data.md

### Existing approaches 

 * During the COVID-19 pandemic, many countries implemented [contact tracing apps](https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/coronavirus-response/travel-during-coronavirus-pandemic/contact-tracing-and-warning-apps-during-covid-19_en ) that anonymised user data to protect individual privacy. 
 * The use of [blockchain technology in Estonia’s digital healthcare](https://e-estonia.com/blockchain-healthcare-estonian-experience/) system enhances the security of health data by creating tamper-proof records for every patient encounter.
 * [The WHO’s Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS)](https://www.who.int/initiatives/global-influenza-surveillance-and-response-system) provides standardised testing procedures and reagents to laboratories worldwide, ensuring the accuracy and reliability of influenza data globally.
 * Data should be shared as openly and as rapidly as possible, for example by uploading SARS-CoV-2 sequence to [The European Nucleotide Archive (ENA)](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/home). ENA  is an open, supported platform for the management, sharing, integration, archiving and dissemination of sequence data. 

>  * [The GISAID](https://gisaid.org/) Data Science Initiative platform promotes the rapid sharing of data, from priority pathogens including influenza, hCoV-19, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), hMpxV as well as arboviruses including chikungunya, dengue and zika. It includes genetic sequence and related clinical and epidemiological data associated with human viruses, and geographical as well as species-specific data associated with avian and other animal viruses. However, GISAID is much more restrictive on data reuse compared to ENA, for example. 

Reviewer: Same here, GISAID can be a tool {% tool "gisaid" %}

---
title: Human clinical and health data
description: Guidance in describing human clinical and health data.
contributors: [Miriam Saso, Pierluca Piselli, Shona Cosgrove, Iris Van Dam, Romain David, Hedi Peterson, Diana Pilvar]
no_robots: false
search_exclude: false

> sitemap: true

Reviewer: These can be deleted!

 * Data discovery: Helps researchers locate and understand datasets.
 * Regulatory compliance: Ensures adherence to privacy and security standards.

To achieve greater results, metadata standards have been developed across different domains, increasing metadata records' interoperability. Such standards can have different functions and therefore, have a complementary role to each other.

It is important that one’s study is planned with [data sharing](https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/data_publication) in mind when applicable. This will help identify the information necessary to share data effectively and make it easier to generate well-structured and complete documentation.

#### Relevance of metadata in Infectious Disease Data

Metadata is essential in infectious disease settings for:

 * Tracking and surveillance: enables effective monitoring of disease incidence and spread.
 * Data integration: facilitates combining data from various healthcare systems for comprehensive analysis.
 * Research and Public Health: supports epidemiological studies and public health interventions.
 * Regulatory compliance: ensures data privacy and security standards are met.

#### Considerations 

>  * The infectious disease field is rather new to the concept of metadata, so cataloguing information about datasets is implemented less systematically than in other fields. However, with the new [European Health Data Space](https://health.ec.europa.eu/ehealth-digital-health-and-care/european-health-data-space_en#:~:text=The%20European%20Health%20Data%20Space%20will%20provide%20a%20trustworthy%20setting,Network%20and%20Information%20Systems%20Directive.) legislation, this is likely to change soon. One of the key action points of the legislation includes the development of national metadata catalogues for promoting the reusability of data. Front runners such as Finland (Findata](https://findata.fi/en/) will have little to do. Most other European countries, though, have started discussions on how to begin or continue developing a metadata catalogue for health data. 

Reviewer: Findata has a 
```suggestion
 * The infectious disease field is rather new to the concept of metadata, so cataloguing information about datasets is implemented less systematically than in other fields. However, with the new [European Health Data Space](https://health.ec.europa.eu/ehealth-digital-health-and-care/european-health-data-space_en#:~:text=The%20European%20Health%20Data%20Space%20will%20provide%20a%20trustworthy%20setting,Network%20and%20Information%20Systems%20Directive.) legislation, this is likely to change soon. One of the key action points of the legislation includes the development of national metadata catalogues for promoting the reusability of data. Front runners such as Finland ([Findata](https://findata.fi/en/)) will have little to do. Most other European countries, though, have started discussions on how to begin or continue developing a metadata catalogue for health data. 
```

Do we want to add Findata as a tool?

 * Given the diverse types and sources of human clinical and health data, it is crucial to provide detailed information about study and data collection methods. This allows researchers to assess the reliability of the data and how competently it was generated. The information is usually organised following research community guidelines, and then structured as metadata to make the data FAIR. In a registered study, it is important to give information that helps people retrieve more information on the study itself (e.g. external links and published material).
 * It is crucial and mandatory to describe how the privacy of human research subjects and patients was guaranteed. Whilst providing complete data descriptions is advisable, some data will need to be anonymised before it can be shared. You should describe how and why sensitive data were masked or removed (see [Handling of health data](#handling-of-health-data) below)

#### Existing approaches 
 * **Generic metadata standards**

>     * [DCAT](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat-2/) is a metadata standard for publishing data catalogues on the web. It facilitates sharing of data and the interoperability between data catalogues. Furthermore, it allows for federated searches of datasets across catalogues on multiple sites. This further increases the findability of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * {% tool "dcat"%} is a metadata standard for publishing data catalogues on the web. It facilitates sharing of data and the interoperability between data catalogues. Furthermore, it allows for federated searches of datasets across catalogues on multiple sites. This further increases the findability of data.
```

>     * DCAT extension: One of the European Commission’s key priorities for 2019-2025 has been the creation of a [European Health Data Space](https://health.ec.europa.eu/ehealth-digital-health-and-care/european-health-data-space_en) to promote digital transformation, and to optimise and widen the use of health data. In this regard, The [EHDS-2 Pilot](https://www.ehds2pilot.eu/) is developing a DCAT extension capable of capturing key information that should be available on a metadata record related to health data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * DCAT extension: One of the European Commission’s key priorities for 2019-2025 has been the creation of a {% tool "ehds" %} to promote digital transformation, and to optimise and widen the use of health data. In this regard, The [EHDS-2 Pilot](https://www.ehds2pilot.eu/) is developing a DCAT extension capable of capturing key information that should be available on a metadata record related to health data. 
```

>     * [Schema.org](https://schema.org/) is a metadata standard that helps search engines index web pages. It improves the machine-readability of the pages and so increases the discoverability of datasets. Schema.org tags also add semantics, and allow search engines to understand the type of content available on the web page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * {% tool "schema-org" %} is a metadata standard that helps search engines index web pages. It improves the machine-readability of the pages and so increases the discoverability of datasets. Schema.org tags also add semantics, and allow search engines to understand the type of content available on the web page.
```

 * **Data quality** considerations involve ensuring that ontologies contribute to the accuracy, reliability, and completeness of health data. This is fundamental for high-quality data analysis and decision-making. 
 * **Privacy and ethics** are paramount, addressing concerns related to data confidentiality and ethical use, which should be incorporated into the ontology design to guide responsible data handling practices.

#### Existing Approaches

 * For interoperability, standardisation is essential for maintaining consistency and accuracy in data representation, which can be achieved by utilising widely accepted vocabularies like ICD-10 and SNOMED CT.
 * Tools like the Ontology Lookup Service (OLS) and NCBO BioPortal provide access to various biomedical ontologies, supporting standardisation efforts and improving data quality and utility. These resources help researchers and healthcare providers ensure that their data adheres to the highest standards of accuracy and consistency.

>     * [NCBO BioPortal](http://bioportal.bioontology.org/): NCBO BioPortal is an extensive repository and web-based platform that provides access to a wide array of biomedical ontologies and terminologies, enabling users to search, browse, and utilise these resources for research and data annotation purposes.

Reviewer: Also in this section we might want to make use of our existing tools/add them to the tool list: https://github.com/martin-nc/infectious-diseases-toolkit/blob/martinc-hchd/_data/tool_and_resource_list.yml

Author: So I should add the Ontology Lookup Service (OLS) and NCBO BioPortal to the tool list (as they're not there)? I guess we don't add vocabularies like ICD-10?

I'll add links to HL7 and OMOP, since I see the links aren't in the text.

Reviewer: Reason why I brought it up was because we do have them in the RDMkit added as a tool:

```
- description: EMBL-EBI's web portal for finding ontologies
  id: ontology-lookup-service
  name: Ontology Lookup Service
  registry:
    biotools: ols
    fairsharing: Mkl9RR
    tess: Ontology Lookup Service
  url: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/index
- description: A comprehensive repository of biomedical ontologies
  id: bioportal
  name: BioPortal
  registry:
    biotools: bioportal
    fairsharing: 4m97ah
    tess: BioPortal
  url: https://bioportal.bioontology.org
- description: Collaborative effort to develob interoperable ontologies for the biological sciences
  id: the-open-biological-and-biomedical-ontology-foundry
  name: The Open Biological and Biomedical Ontology (OBO) Foundry
  registry:
    fairsharing-coll: bsg-d001083
  url: http://obofoundry.org
---

Reviewer: vocabularies we don't do normally indeed!
